# Listening 

## Podacts & documentaries about time perception
### JRE #1233 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wieRZoJSVtw)
### TED-Ed "Does time exists?
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3tbVHlsKhs)
### Big think "Time: Do the past, present and future exist all at once ?
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5vzymaIabWI)


# Useful infos : 
Illusion of time, Order to Disorder, complexity emerging briefly from decay, Past/Present/Future happening all at once : you are dead trillions of years ago yet you aren't even born yet. Time as a Tide or a Movie in the emergent property theory.

## Theory of relativity
(TED-Ed, 0:58) Albert Einstein theory of relativity states that time passes for everyone 
but not at the same rate for people in different situations. For instance if you travel at the speed of light : time slowes (Big Think, 8:04).

Space-Time as a single "thing", a four dimensional bloc in which the past and the future are just like spatial diemnsions (like North/South) in the equations of phsysics (Big Think, 2:00). You can construct a view of the world where the future is already there. In the fundamental laws of physics, physicists do say that there is no distinction between the past and future and even though it is in conflict with our intuitions about the world, from that perspective, time is not an independent element but rather another dimension, like sapce. There is a big question that isn't resovled yet tho : How is it that we can move in space in all any direction but through time in only one ? The past is always behind us --> arrow of time (TED-Ed, 1:38)

## The second law of thermodynamics
Basic common sense thing that things go to s*#@ (JRE Brian Cox, 1:29:52).
Systems will gain disorder over time --> exemple of the food coloring spreading in the cub of water and not recollecting. Systems in our universe move from order to disorder and it is this property of the universe that defines the direction of the times arrow (TED-Ed, 2:20).

"What we strongly suspect, And I would say "no", is that in that process going from order to disorder, complexity emerges naturally for a brief period of time. So, it is a natural part of the evolution of the universe that you get a period in time when there's complexity in the universe. So, stars, planets, galaxies, life and civilization. BUT they exist BECAUSE the universe is decaying and not IN SPITE of the fact the universe is decaying. So, our existence in that sort of picture is necessary finite and necessary time limited. And, it is a remarkable thing that that complexity has gone so far that there "are" things in the universe that can think, feel, and explore it. If you want an answer to the meaning of it all, it's that." (JRE Brian Cox,1:30)

## Time as an emergent property
As a thought experiment : ff a time-starved equation like the Wheeler Dewitt's one (Theory of Everything, speculative) turned out to be true, would that men that time does not exist at the most fundamental level ? Coud time be an illusion generated by the limitations us humans percieve the universe ? We do not yet know. But instead of asking if time exists as a fundamental property, we could think of its existence as an emergent one.

Emergent properties are things that don't exist in individual pieces of a system but do exist for the system as a whole : each individual water molecul doesn't have a tide but the whole ocean does. A movie creates change through time by using a series of still images that appear to have a fluid continuious change between them. Flipping through the images fast enough, our brain percieves the passage of time from the sequence of still images. No indivudal frame of the movie changes or contains the passage of time but it's a property that comes out from how to pieces are strung together. The movement is real, yet also an illusion. Could the physics of time somehow be a similar illusion ? (TED-Ed,3:28)
